[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Hi.
This is Lisa Garr, host
of "Gaiam Inspirations."
So when life completely
changes and every single thing
that you know gets
uprooted, what do you do?
Well, intuition expert and
bestselling author Sonia
Choquette, she went on a walk.
A long walk.
A 1,000-mile walk.
Her brother and father died
and a long marriage ended,
and she packed up and walked
the Camino de Santiago.
Is a spiritual
pilgrimage spanning
500 miles over the Pyrenees
Mountains of Northern Spain.
She did it twice, and
she's joining us now
to share her journey.
Welcome back.
>>SONIA CHOQUETTE: I'm so
happy to be back, Lisa.
>>LISA: My goodness, so
much has happened since I
spoke with you last on Gaiam.
The last time we
talked to you had just
completed your first Camino.
>>CHOQUETTE: I'd
just completed it,
and I was still
reorganizing, because walking
the Camino changed me
on a cellular level.
It was so profoundly healing,
and it also was so interactive
because every day something
that I experienced on the Camino
absolutely mirrored what
was going on inside of me.
Even for example, I went
and walked in silence,
but I did make one friend.
And the only person I
really connected to,
his name was Patrick.
And that's the same
name as my husband who
I'd just ended my marriage
with, so right away it
was like, really?
OK, OK.
>>LISA: Let's back up a
minute, because the last time
you were here you had talked
about this beautiful spiritual
pilgrimage, which we're going
to talk about the history of.
And you said that you and
Patrick were getting back
together, or working on it.
>>CHOQUETTE: That
was our intention.
When I came back the
first time, Patrick
had asked me if I would
consider a reconciliation,
and I said, of course.
And we were going
to walk it together.
But he decided right
before we were to leave
that that wasn't where he was.
That wasn't where his heart was.
And so he decided not to go.
>>LISA: Wow.
Wow.
>>CHOQUETTE: And it was
a second chattering.
And yet, I wasn't surprised.
I just knew that I
was to walk it again.
>>LISA: Let me ask you about
that-- it wasn't a surprise--
because all of your books
have been on intuition
and following your guidance.
Did you feel that coming at all?
>>CHOQUETTE: I
felt the ambiguity.
And yet, with intuition
it's not the future set.
You're just riding the waves.
But I could feel the waves
becoming morning congruent.
The truth is that
where I am in life
and where my ex-husband
was in life at the time,
and where we had been for a
greater part of our experience
together, wasn't congruent.
So I was devastated, because
I was involved and invested
in keeping my marriage together.
>>LISA: You were moving
in that direction.
>>CHOQUETTE: I was
moving in that direction.
But the thing about
intuition is I could feel it,
and I knew that it was right.
That doesn't mean it
was OK or it felt good.
When you know something
intellectually,
it doesn't exonerate you
from feeling things deeply.
And so I just had to
embody yet another death.
>>LISA: Wow.
Wow.
>>CHOQUETTE: I chose to
walk the Camino again.
>>LISA: What is the history
behind the Camino de Santiago?
Well it's a history that
goes back so far that it even
goes back prior to what is
now known as the Camino.
It's thousands of
years old, and it
is known as all these roads--
because the one I walked
is only one of several
different roads, paths--
that all converge and eventually
lead to Santiago, which
means St. James in Spanish.
And the legend is that that is
where the bones of St. James
the Apostle were buried, and
that St. James took his mission
to Spain and this is
where the Pilgrims would
go to ask for forgiveness, to
forgive others in their life,
and to purify their
heart and spirit.
And it goes back
thousands of years,
and it has been
traveled by millions.
>>LISA: Is there a mystery
at the end of it there?
Where you said the legend is,
that his bones were buried
there, was there some
type of a miracle
that happens at that rock?
>>CHOQUETTE: Well,
apparently what happened
was that a farmer or someone
in Spain found this grave,
and it was marked as
the bones of St. James.
But what's interesting is
that before it was that path,
the ancient Celts also
traveled that path.
So it's legend to follow lay
lines, or energetic lines--
>>LISA: Grids.
I see.
>>CHOQUETTE: And also
to follow the Milky Way.
And I have to say, whatever
it is, it's not of this earth.
>>LISA: It's deeply,
deeply spiritual.
>>CHOQUETTE: It's a
different frequency.
>>LISA: Really?
>>CHOQUETTE: It is.
It's not normal.
>>LISA: When do you start
to attune to that frequency?
>>CHOQUETTE: I suppose
it's unique for everyone.
I felt it the first
day when I walked it,
because I trashed my
feet having not prepared
and broken in my boots.
And my toes were so devastated,
but I could still walk.
How I even got my boots on.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>CHOQUETTE: And I
remember one day I woke up
and I decided, I'm done.
I'm outta here.
I was planning my escape.
And I go to breakfast and
there was a man, and he said,
the greeting is
always "buen camino,"
which means have a good way.
And so he said, buen camino.
How are you?
And I said, I'm leaving.
I'm done.
And he goes, oh, no you're not.
And I said, I am.
He goes, oh, no you're not.
We're going to have
breakfast and you're
going to keep walking.
And I said, don't
you feel like this?
And he goes, every day.
I'm like this every day, but
we're going to keep going.
OK.
And I never saw him again.
I swear he was an angel.
And just that 30
seconds of exchange,
I was able to make
it another day,
and then-- there's
something about it
that just, at least
for me, compelled me.
I have spoken with
other pilgrims,
and they all agree--
something happens.
>>LISA: Now, did you have
breakfast with that man,
or did you keep--
>>CHOQUETTE: No.
>>LISA: Oh, you didn't
even have breakfast?
>>CHOQUETTE: No, we didn't
even have breakfast.
He was leaving and I was
coming, and that was that.
>>LISA: That was it, just
a 30 second interaction?
That's amazing.
>>CHOQUETTE: I was just the
way he said it, "Oh no, you're
not going.
Oh, I feel like that, too."
>>LISA: We're going
to take a look here
at the visual images that are
so beautiful of Sonia walking
the Camino.
Take a look.
>>CHOQUETTE: My name
is Sonia Choquette,
and for the last 30 years
I've been a spiritual teacher
and for the last 20 I've
been a published author.
And I've spoken to people all
over the world, inspiring them,
helping them, lifting them up.
And I have loved it.
Everything was going well
until a few years ago.
In the course of six weeks my
brother died, my father died,
my marriage imploded, and my
life as I knew it fell apart.
I taught thousands of
people around the world.
I was the one who was
lifting people up,
so I couldn't understand why
I couldn't lift myself up.
This shouldn't be
happening to me.
I received the
guidance that I was
supposed to leave everything
behind and walk a pilgrimage.
The Camino de
Santiago, also known
as the Way of St. James,
the Way of Forgiveness.
My pilgrimage began not
just looking at a mountain
but at a mountain
range, and it felt
like the mountain of old stuff.
It was overwhelming.
It was spring, almost June, and
the second day of my pilgrimage
it snowed.
And so now I had to walk through
mud and muck and ice and cold,
just like all the
pieces of my life
that I had not yet
fully healed from.
Step by difficult step,
something really big
was happening.
Old emotions that
I had shoved aside
started breaking up,
moving on, and giving me
a little more freedom.
Forgiveness started
coming back, and one step
at a time pieces of me that
I didn't even know I had lost
started coming back.
And more and more, I started
to feel grounded, healed.
More and more, I walked
myself back into the most
profound level of wholeness that
I have ever experienced or knew
was possible in my life.
I walked home.
>>LISA: So you did this
not once but twice.
And I said in the beginning
you walked 1,000 miles,
but one day at a time.
>>CHOQUETTE: One day at a time.
>>LISA: When you hit
that place of silence,
when you got to the place
of being in complete silence
and you said you met Patrick.
That was the second time.
>>CHOQUETTE: On my first Camino.
>>LISA: Oh, the first one.
>>CHOQUETTE: On
the first Camino.
You know, the
interesting thing is
that what took me to
the Camino, and what
I think is so important, is
that I'm a spiritual person
and I have been all my life.
But I had all these emotions
that were not spiritual.
>>LISA: Explain.
>>CHOQUETTE: Anger.
And in the two deaths--
my brother who died,
he had a lot of
trouble with drugs.
But while he was
alive, I accepted.
I understood.
But after he died, I was angry.
These were emotions
that I had pushed aside,
because I'm spiritual.
I was angry with my father,
because he really never
supported or witnessed me.
And while he was
alive, I understood.
And I was so angry
with my husband.
And yet, an angry woman is
not an acceptable woman.
So I'd put all
these emotions away,
but after all this death and
loss, they came exploding up
and I don't know
where to put them.
So that's what took
me on the Camino.
Both times, because
the second time
I went I was to go
with my husband,
and we were to reconnect.
And right before we did,
he had another choice.
And I understood.
But I had all these
emotions still.
>>LISA: That is a great point.
How do you have that
spiritual awareness,
where you're accepting
of all things,
and still hold on-- or
not hold on, but express--
>>CHOQUETTE: Feel and express.
Feel my human experience.
So the brilliance
of the Camino is
it allowed me to walk
with my own experience,
walk with my emotions,
and be present to them.
And in being present, they
transformed naturally.
>>LISA: Do you
think that you could
have that experience of
expressing that anger
without walking the Camino?
How?
>>CHOQUETTE: For me,
without having some way
to move that energy
through us and really
be present without shame and
guilt and trying to package it
and rise above it with
our spiritual tools--
just be with our
human experience.
We can walk around the
block, walk on the beach,
but move with the energy.
Be with the energy.
For me was so healing,
because eventually that energy
was heard and received, and it
deepened my compassion for me.
>>LISA: It was heard
and received by you?
>>CHOQUETTE: By me.
>>LISA: When you walked,
what was the mind chatter?
Was it physical expression?
What was it?
>>CHOQUETTE: It was
a process that had
kind of a rhythm of its own.
In the morning, the pain of
just getting my boots on.
Then getting in the road.
And then you feel
the exuberance.
And then I would walk and
then all these emotions.
Some of them were from when
I was a child or a teenager--
that I'd forgotten--
would rise up.
And then I would walk
with that, and then
I would talk to the
Camino and the Camino
would talk back to me.
>>LISA: Explain that.
>>CHOQUETTE: I would
say, what is this
and why is this happening?
And the Camino would be present.
It had its own
consciousness, and it
would just, say just listen.
Just be with yourself.
Be with your experience.
And some days I would
yell at it and some days
that I would just
be shown a place
to sit and watch the water,
or sit and lay on the ground.
There was this very intimate
interaction with where I was,
and everything was alive.
Everything-- the road, the
road, the trees, the rocks--
it was all alive.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>CHOQUETTE: And it
moved through me.
And what was left
by around noon--
I had a couple more hours to
walk-- was quiet in my head.
And I was just present and
just watching and walking,
because I had to make sure
I didn't fall down, and just
be present.
And I think that was part
of what was so healing.
>>LISA: What was
that quietness like?
There was no more mind
chatter, there was no outside--
>>CHOQUETTE: Nothing.
my mind wasn't talking.
It was just being here.
And I can still go there now.
>>LISA: You can?
>>CHOQUETTE: Yeah.
It changed me.
And it changed me because I was
able to feel all my feelings
and not be ashamed.
Spirituality has a shadow side.
>>LISA: Oh yeah.
>>CHOQUETTE: We're
clever people,
and we're supposed to--
you're having a pain?
Well, you created that.
You're having a pain?
Well, that's your karma.
And I've always felt that
shadow side was unfair.
We can't experience life without
pain, because it's temporary.
It will be painful.
>>LISA: How do you go forward
now and experience pain?
What's your
relationship to it now?
>>CHOQUETTE: I embody all
of my emotions now as holy,
and I don't fear them.
I don't fear pain.
I don't fear my anger.
I don't wallow in
it, but I listen,
and I honor it this is part
of my human experience.
>>LISA: Do you still get
triggered or lit up by things
that your husband does now?
>>CHOQUETTE: Well, I
have no contact with him.
We're on separate paths.
But I can get very triggered.
I'm psychic.
I'm sensitive.
Energy affects me.
But at least now I can
let it move through me,
and I can be with it and I can
be compassionate with myself
and say, I have to
value my sensitivity.
And it's not a sacred cow, but
I have to love that part of me.
And so then when I love
that part of me and say,
what is this about--
because I've always
been comfortable loving
everyone else-- it was me
that was the challenge.
So with my triggers
now, I know that there's
just something there, I need to
love for me a little bit more.
>>LISA: So you're
still the same in terms
of your intuition,
your sensibility,
your sensitivities,
but you're just
looking at things differently.
>>CHOQUETTE: The biggest
shift for me is now
that I have had
such a connection
with my own emotions,
I feel that my capacity
to have compassion for all human
beings has grown exponentially.
The human journey is painful.
We are so sensitive as humans.
We deny it, but we're
still sensitive.
And I feel with people at a deep
level, and I can be with people
and not buffer myself
from my own pain or yours.
I can be present.
And that is huge for me.
>>LISA: What you just
said is so honest and raw.
The human journey is painful.
We don't like to
say that, do we?
>>CHOQUETTE: No.
And especially in any
spiritually context,
we like to be clever and
outsmart that people.
But we can't.
>>LISA: And intellectualize
it, or heal it.
>>CHOQUETTE: Or heal it.
And maybe it just is what it is.
>>LISA: Just is pain.
>>CHOQUETTE: And
pain is holy, too.
>>LISA: Maybe the
quicker you accept it,
the quicker it leaves.
But maybe it doesn't
need to leave.
>>CHOQUETTE: Well I
know for me, grief.
>>LISA: Right.
>>CHOQUETTE: And that's
another feeling people are not
that available to.
We have to get over our grief.
But I'm in grief.
My marriage ending--
I'm grieving still.
It doesn't mean I'm possessed.
>>LISA: But you're not
quick to get over it.
>>CHOQUETTE: But it
has its own cycle.
I can't.
I can only be with it.
>>LISA: Yes.
Part of being with it
is you moved to Paris.
>>CHOQUETTE: I had
this inspiration.
Actually it was my daughter, who
saw me in such grief, and said,
Mom, you need a
change and you need
to go where you remember who
you are before the marriage.
And I love France.
I lived there.
I have a deep connection
to the Magdalene.
>>LISA: Oh, the--
>>CHOQUETTE: Yes.
Deep connection
to Mary Magdalene,
and I know my roots have
been traced back there.
So it just was right.
I don't know what I'm doing.
I don't have a plan.
I'm just listening.
And that's really
the other thing,
that since I walked
the Camino two times--
>>LISA: Two times.
That's amazing.
>>CHOQUETTE: I don't have plans.
I know God has plans
for me, that if I agree
can be expressed through me.
And so my mind is a lot
quieter and peaceful.
I'm not planning ahead.
>>LISA: For the first time?
You seem excited about this.
>>CHOQUETTE: It's
such a sweet space.
>>LISA: But you are, in the
meantime, teaching tools.
Still in the meantime
as you learn them, you--
>>CHOQUETTE: I know
I'm here to teach,
and I know that you
cannot really be effective
as a teacher if you haven't
really experienced pain
and what other
people experience,
and if you haven't really walked
your talk, at least for me.
I'm grateful that
I can teach this.
I'm grateful that I can share
with people the encouragement
to not be ashamed of
your vulnerabilities,
and not feel like what
spiritual is to get over them.
>>LISA: That's very well said.
And you have probably more to
teach now than you ever have.
>>CHOQUETTE: Absolutely.
>>LISA: You had great
intuition information,
but this comes from a
totally different place.
>>CHOQUETTE: And I think
it merges with intuition,
because it is the feminine side.
But it dives into life
and says, if we are really
going to heal our planet and
find compassion for one another
and stop living in such
an insane detachment
from humanity, that we hurt
each other the way we do,
we have to feel.
And we have to quit
getting away from that.
If we don't feel pain, how will
we ever also feel compassion?
>>LISA: Do you think
that a small community
of spiritual teachers,
and the community
is small, of
personal development
and spiritual
teachers-- maybe there's
several thousand--
that's very small.
Even if there's
100,000, it's small.
Do you think that we can
make that big of a dent?
>>CHOQUETTE: I think we are,
and I think every conversation
ripples.
And we don't know
where those ripples go.
In fact, I shared this with you.
We talked about the communal
once before, my first journey.
And when I went again,
there were so many people
that I ran into who recognized
me from our conversation.
They saw the video.
And they were from
all over the world.
>>LISA: From seeing it on Gaiam.
That wonderful.
>>CHOQUETTE: And
I was so touched.
>>LISA: That's wonderful.
>>CHOQUETTE: I was so
humbled, and I was so excited.
>>LISA: It hits a nerve.
>>CHOQUETTE: These
conversations,
and this opening of energy,
has a big power behind it.
>>LISA: Got it.
Got it.
I'm going to have you take
a look at some of the videos
that Sonia does with
teaching some of the tools
she's learned along the way.
Take a look.
>>CHOQUETTE: Hi,
I'm Sonia Choquette,
and I want to welcome you
first of all to my web page.
And especially to
this part, which
is a conversation about
readings and what they involve.
People ask me all the
time, what is a reading?
What will I experience?
What will I receive out of it?
Those are very good
questions, and I'm here
to just demystify that
a little bit for you.
First of all, I am a spiritual
teacher and an intuitive guide.
So in a reading,
you will both be
shown a bit of the way
in your life experience
and be given lessons to
improve your life experience.
You can bring any
sorts of issues.
People wonder, well, why
would I get a reading?
We reach for readings when we're
at those junctions in our life
where we're really
stuck or where
we need some inspiration
or fresh insight,
or a perspective, that would
allow us to move forward.
I help people with emotional
issues, relationship issues,
financial issues, work issues,
purpose in life issues,
health issues-- any
challenge that you have.
Connecting with me,
I connect to source
and I connect to the guides--
both mine and yours--
and we're shown sort of
the blueprint of your life,
your soul intentions,
your purpose,
as well as your blind
spots and your lessons,
which are very difficult for
us to recognize and really
move through with
grace unless we
do have some sort of guidance.
So I serve as the one who
puts light on your path,
gives you direction, helps you
bypass, or avoid, the repeating
obstacles that you keep running
into or you keep creating,
and show you another way.
I will also help you
connect with your guides
and your higher
self, which can then
begin to make decisions
that serve you
rather than your lower self--
or your emotional self,
or your wound itself-- which
may be trying to protect you,
but isn't doing a very
good job of it and,
most likely, alienating
everyone else in the process.
A reading takes
about 30 minutes,
if you want to just
have a quick overview.
Or we can go into a
little more depth.
We can have an hour
reading, in which case
you can explore
things and become
a little bit better informed.
I also do what's
called transmissions.
Because I work so much
with the guided realm,
I actually am shifting and
elevating your vibration,
and reconnecting you with
your own authentic self,
clearing away some of the
cords and the connections
and the patternings
and the attachments
that have accumulated
in your life
and prevent you from living
your most yourself, your most
authentic divine self, and
making choices from that place.
So there's an energetic
shift that occurs.
It's very positive
and really helps
you feel that you are
living in alignment
with the you you really want to
be at the most profound level.
It's informative, practical,
grounded, realistic,
but energetically uplifting
and healing to have a reading.
And I'm really good at it.
I really do a good job
of helping you get back
on the path that you
want to get and create
the life you want to live.
So I invite you to
have the experience.
You will absolutely love it.
In that short period of
time, everything can change.
I tell people, it's not there
we have that many problems,
but if we don't know
how to address them
they cause that
many difficulties.
So if we learn our lessons,
we shift ourself from problem
to solution, which is what
I do, life becomes a joy.
And I hope that I can be of
service to you in that way.
>>LISA: So all along the Camino
and along the areas where
you would have to go
at night, did you ever
know where you were staying?
Some people--
>>CHOQUETTE: I did.
>>LISA: You did?
You made reservations.
>>CHOQUETTE: I made those
choices to stay at little
houses where people
would take in the--
>>LISA: Yes.
So people give up their house
for a certain period of time,
right?
>>CHOQUETTE: They just
welcome us as pilgrims.
And they treat us as
something very holy.
It's just so humbling.
And they feed you,
and they're kind.
They're receiving.
>>LISA: And some help
you soak your feet.
>>CHOQUETTE: Yes.
And then there's the
albergues, if you
want that experience, where
everybody rents a bed in rooms.
Sometimes there's 30
pilgrims all in a room,
and you're all together.
You all sleep together, and
then you get up in the morning
and out the door at dawn.
The reason I didn't
do the albergues
is because the amount of
availability in the albergues
is limited, so people
get up really early
and they end of
running to the next one
to make sure they get their bed.
First of all--
>>LISA: That's stressful.
>>CHOQUETTE: --I
destroyed my feet,
so that was not even an option.
I was in so much pain
and it's a miracle
I would make it from one city
to one town or one village.
It was 25 kilometers,
26-- just about 18 miles.
Every day.
And so I couldn't run.
I couldn't compete.
So I just would stay
at my little pensions.
I planned it.
And there are people
who didn't, and we still
ended up at the same places.
So you can show
up with no plans,
and you will be absolutely fine.
>>LISA: Between the first
one and the second one--
I remember the first one
you had snow and rain--
>>CHOQUETTE: And cold.
And the second one
was blisteringly hot.
>>LISA: Really?
You had the opposite.
>>CHOQUETTE: Same time of
year, blisteringly hot.
And I thought, of course.
Of course.
I can't have the same
experience, because we never
have a same experience.
So again, every day was a very
different meeting of myself
and meeting of God and
meeting of earth and meeting
of the moods of nature,
and I was very humbled
all over again.
>>LISA: There's miles
and miles stretches
where there's no shade,
no covering, whatsoever.
>>CHOQUETTE: None.
No shade at all.
That's called the Masada.
It's the middle part, and that's
where most of your deepest,
buried, unwitnessed,
not honored,
incomplete experiences come out.
>>LISA: Parts of yourself
come back together again.
>>CHOQUETTE: And that
to me is the healing.
You reconnect to your fragments.
You call them back home.
>>LISA: The people that
you met along the way,
as you would see someone
maybe in a healing crisis,
would the healer part of
you want to help that person
or honor them?
>>CHOQUETTE: I would
always be willing to help,
and there was always-- if
anything, anybody in a healing
crisis had absolutely more
help than they probably really
could manage.
But there was many times
where what I was able to offer
was like a pair of
shoes or a jacket.
And I thought, why
am I bringing this?
This is too much.
And then it would be for
someone that I-- intuition,
and I'll know it right
in the front of my brain,
intuition is you move
and do without thinking,
trusting that that
will all make sense.
Even when I went with
way too much stuff,
I ended it with almost
nothing, because it
was necessary at some point
to give it away to someone
who really needed it.
>>LISA: What do you
would suggest people
go with in the beginning?
You said you hadn't enough
miles in your shoes.
>>CHOQUETTE: Boots
that you broke in.
Be sure to do that.
And very little else--
two shirts, a sun shirt,
a very good hat, a
poncho, walking poles.
That's it.
>>LISA: Do you wash your
socks along the way?
>>CHOQUETTE: Yeah.
You can hang them on your
backpack and they'll dry.
If you're staying
at a little place,
sometimes you could just
hang them on the balcony.
I would put them
on my blow dryer
and they would fill
up like a balloon.
They're wool socks, so
they dried very quickly.
>>LISA: Is it expensive
to go on the Camino?
>>CHOQUETTE: I really
worked this out.
If you're really going to
indulge yourself and have
a wonderful experience, you can
do that for about $35 a day.
>>LISA: Wow.
Wow.
>>CHOQUETTE: And you
really are having it all.
You can bring that
back to about $20, $25,
but that would really cover it.
>>LISA: And you could walk
any distance that you choose.
>>CHOQUETTE: You choose.
I chose to walk over 35 days,
but you can walk twice as long
and go half as far, depending
on what is your calling.
>>LISA: So when you get
there, does your calling
change and morph along the way?
>>CHOQUETTE: The Camino is a
very interactive experience.
You are having a direct
experience with sacred energy
and mother nature, and so
every day it will inform you.
>>LISA: Was it a
walking meditation
that you would do every
day, or would you ever
sit and actually do a full?
>>CHOQUETTE: No, I
was always walking.
Part of the way is
because if I would
sit-- I would pause
occasionally--
but when I stopped it was
so hard on my feet to get
going again that I'd just go.
But I didn't go fast.
>>LISA: You walked
at a very good pace.
>>CHOQUETTE: I walked
and looked and listened.
>>LISA: We're going
to take a look here
at another piece
where Sonia is doing
an active meditation with us.
Take a look.
>>CHOQUETTE: Today
I want to offer you
a tool that will help
you calm your mind
and soothe the waters
of your emotions
and help give you a little space
so you don't feel overwhelmed,
and help you come back
to your true nature--
your spirit and
your inner guidance.
It's a tool I call
instant meditation.
The first thing I'd
like to ask you to do
is think about all the
conditions in your life
and how they're affecting you--
tugging, pulling, pushing you
around, overwhelming you.
And then, as if you're
in the middle of a movie,
I want to take a breath
in through the nose
and then exhale as though you're
blowing out a birthday candle
and you're going
to release as you
do this all that energy shifting
and tugging and pulling on you,
like this.
Exhale until you
empty your belly.
And then next, breathe
in through the nose.
And when you do that, you'll
notice that you can actually
breathe into the full
cavity of your body,
into your solar plexus,
into your heart space.
And then let out the
sound, [SIGHING].
And as you do that,
imagine your inner self
expanding from your spinal
column all the way up.
And it begins to
open up and push
the energy in all six directions
out, filling you with light.
So we'll do this again,
breathing in, releasing, in,
[SIGHING].
Imagine your higher self
expanding above and below you,
north and south, east and west.
And then just breathe
for a moment or two
here, imagining that your
mind is quiet, but listening.
Your emotions are
calm, non-reactive,
and you have access
to your higher
self, who oversees everything.
Just a few breathes
in this space
gives you room to breathe.
It's instant meditation.
You can do this with eyes open
or shut, but in either case
everything comes back into
perfect, peaceful alignment.
So this is your
tool for the day.
I know you'll love it, and
I send you all my love.
>>LISA: OK, so can
you tell me how
this has changed, if
any way, your teachings
around intuition, around
listening and following
your guidance.
You said something
to me so powerful
the last time we interviewed
you-- or I interviewed
you; me and my guides-- that
intuition, living without it,
is like living in a room
without the lights on.
>>CHOQUETTE: Right.
>>LISA: And that stuck with
me for so long, because it
is always with us, no matter if
we pay attention to it or not.
>>CHOQUETTE: Right.
>>LISA: Have your
teachings changed at all?
>>CHOQUETTE: My
orientation has shifted.
I will always be a
teacher of intuition.
But our world is a
very lonely world,
and with our phones and
all of our little gadgets
that keep us shifting away
from our feeling body,
it's getting lonely.
>>LISA: I see what
you're saying.
>>CHOQUETTE: And
what I want to do
is help offer
people an invitation
to re-enter their feeling
body, and not run away from it,
and not judge it, and not fear
that their feelings are bigger
than their spirit,
because I truly
believe that our world
needs to learn to love.
But how can we love
another if we're
so buffered that we can't feel?
So we're a bunch of talking
heads, little bump cars,
and we all have
these ideals and what
I call the kumbaya moments,
and we all say, oh, I love you
and namaste.
But nobody's really
feeling the connection
with another human being at
that deep, compassionate level,
and we have to go back there.
It's the same
level of compassion
that we'll feel with
nature and with animals
and with the whales, where
we're not watching it
like we're at the zoo, and
life's there, and oh wow,
interesting, but we're
in the experience
of our full human self,
Listening to our spirit guide
and teach us how to become
more conscious and more sane,
loving human beings.
>>LISA: That's a great
point, because when
you do have that
connection with someone
we look at it as
something that's
unique or special or rare.
But to live in that state of
that connection, that deepness,
all the time is living in
full awareness, isn't it?
>>CHOQUETTE: And it
requires courage.
>>LISA: Explain.
>>CHOQUETTE: First of
all, the word courage
comes from the French word
"coeur," which is heart.
So you have to have a certain
strength and availability
to be present to
the human experience
and to find real, genuine
availability to other people
in a way that allows you
to genuinely hear them,
genuinely care about them.
How can we do that if we
don't even hear and care
about our own needs?
>>LISA: Because our mind is
taking us to the next moment,
and beyond and beyond.
>>CHOQUETTE: Right.
And our own needs-- we're
in a warrior culture.
We've been taught, be strong,
be stoic, get over it,
rise above it.
>>LISA: Set goals.
>>CHOQUETTE: But whatever
you do, don't need much,.
But the truth is, as human
beings we need a lot.
We need nurturing, we need
love, we need compassion,
we need space.
We need breath.
We need to be seen.
We need to be witnessed.
We need the freedom to
follow our intuition
without feeling like we have to
explain ourselves or hide it.
>>LISA: Yet, you
don't appear to me
or come off as a needy person.
Even needing a man,
I don't see you--
>>CHOQUETTE: No.
But there's a difference
between being needy, which
means I am incomplete,
and having needs, which
is, for my spirit to grow
it requires certain things,
just like plants need
earth and water and air.
All human beings need.
But when we say "needy," we
say "I need," slips into needy,
then slips into shame, then
slips into get over it,
then slips into-- and
we've lost ourselves.
So I'm here to suggest
that perhaps if we could
honor our needs and know
we're not incomplete,
but our garden and our
spirit needs to grow,
and we are not self-contained
units, and we need one another.
We do.
>>LISA: Now, in your life,
your daughter's with you.
And she moved with
you to Paris, right?
>>CHOQUETTE: Yeah.
I have two daughters, and the
younger one moved with me.
>>LISA: And you're still in
the healing process, right?
>>CHOQUETTE: Absolutely.
In fact, so much.
If you spend 32 years with
somebody and then they're gone,
it's a death.
It's a death to a whole matrix.
Again, here's the paradox.
My higher self understands.
My spirit accepts.
But my heart hurts.
>>LISA: So what do you do on
a daily basis with that grief?
>>CHOQUETTE: Would you
imagine what I do in Paris?
I walk.
>>LISA: You walk.
>>CHOQUETTE: I walk everywhere.
Walking is my medicine.
And the other thing that's
my medicine is beauty.
I fill my painful
places up with beauty.
In Paris, the markets, the
architecture, the parks--
it's so beautiful.
And I know that one of our
needs as humans is beauty.
>>LISA: Yes, it is.
It is.
>>CHOQUETTE: That's my
medicine, and it is working.
>>LISA: It puts you
in a place of awe.
>>CHOQUETTE: And presence.
You know, when I'm walking in
Paris, I have to pay attention.
It compels me to notice
what's right in front of me.
And so I can feel this cycle of
grief that I'm going through,
and I can respect it.
I don't deny it, but I
don't let it possess me.
>>LISA: You don't label
yourself with "I'm grieving."
>>CHOQUETTE: No.
I'm just aware
that I'm grieving,
and I'm also joyful
at the same time.
And human beings are
complex, and I am inspired
and I'm present and
I know it's all OK.
>>LISA: And you wrote this
book at the same time.
>>CHOQUETTE: Yes.
>>LISA: Tell me about
the power of journaling.
>>CHOQUETTE: Well,
the interesting thing
is, when I went on
the Camino I had
no intention of
writing a book, but I
did have the intention of
not forgetting my experience.
So what I did was I ended
up having a pocket recorder,
and then I would
record every day.
But I was so exhausted.
I had this plan to
record the whole day,
and I would manage maybe to get
five minutes, and then I'm out.
But that five minutes every
day drew me right back
into the experience.
So I started writing, and it was
like walking it all over again.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>CHOQUETTE: It was a
healing, healing experience.
It's very different
than my other books.
>>LISA: That must have been
magical, to go through it--
>>CHOQUETTE: Yes.
I loved it.
>>LISA: --all over again.
Did you see things from
a different perspective?
>>CHOQUETTE: Even writing
it, because I don't plan.
I just write.
And then it was like, yeah.
I miss that, but now I'm getting
that because I'm writing this.
Aha.
>>LISA: What was one
of those moments?
>>CHOQUETTE: Well,
one of the moments
that was so profound
as I was writing
this is I realized
how deeply I am
in love with being in nature.
I loved it, but I didn't
realize how deeply I loved it,
and how deeply I need that.
I'm from Chicago.
I didn't realize--
>>LISA: City girl.
>>CHOQUETTE: --and
now I know that.
That's one big aha.
>>LISA: When you were
out on the Camino
and you met the people that had
seen the other interview, what
was it that drew them?
Did it inspire them
to do the same?
>>CHOQUETTE: Yes.
>>LISA: Wow.
How?
>>CHOQUETTE: I was so humbled.
They said they watched and they
said, I am going to do that.
>>LISA: So let's
talk about that.
It's a calling.
>>CHOQUETTE: It is a calling.
It is a calling.
>>LISA: What draws you?
How does it?
>>CHOQUETTE: Even when
I was called to do it,
I didn't know that
much about it.
>>LISA: You just made
the reservations?
>>CHOQUETTE: But that's
how I live intuitively.
I am that person who, when I
get a calling or I get a vibe,
the answer is yes.
>>LISA: But most people can't
just pick up and go like that,
with jobs and kids and--
>>CHOQUETTE: No, but you can
decide, and the way opens.
You can decide, and then
it miraculously opens up.
>>LISA: That's a
cool way to live.
>>CHOQUETTE: It is.
Even I didn't know I could do
it on any level, but I said yes
and then there it is.
I said yes.
>>LISA: Had they gone through
other experiences that
were people in their lives?
>>CHOQUETTE: Some of them.
Some of them, no.
Some of them were
just in a void.
There was nothing going
on in their lives,
and that's the
worst kind of pain.
They've gotten so
numbed out that life
took on sort of a rote routine
that just had no variation.
There was no contact with life.
Some people came because they
wanted a great adventure.
Whatever calls you, that's
the thing to go for.
It could be that you
want to just have
a cheap European vacation.
>>LISA: I went and
saw a movie on it,
and some people went to detox.
One woman was completely
off her purpose
and having a horrible time
being so ambiguous in life.
There's so many different--
>>CHOQUETTE: There's as many
ways as there are people.
There are as many reasons
as there are people.
But whatever your reason,
don't need to struggle with it.
Just say yes.
>>LISA: Are there
specific times or seasons
that people do the Camino,
or is it all year round?
>>CHOQUETTE: Well, it
can be all year around.
But the winter can
be pretty difficult,
so it really dwindles down.
And it doesn't even have
to start where I started.
There's many roads on it.
But ideally, you'll either
go in the late spring
or you'll go in early fall,
because the summer can
be intensely hot.
>>LISA: Even though you
went in the late spring?
>>CHOQUETTE: I went
in late spring,
and it was intensely
hot the second time
but it was snowing
the first time.
And then I also say,
whenever it is, just go,
because it'll be the
perfect experience for you.
And I can promise you that.
>>LISA: Oh, I'm sure.
>>CHOQUETTE: It'll be
the perfect experience,
and you don't know
what it'll be.
>>LISA: I mean,
really, honestly,
20 to 30 days out of
your life is nothing
in order to just
transform your whole life.
>>CHOQUETTE: And the
truth is, as souls, we
need more time to just be
available to our spirits.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>CHOQUETTE: I think
it's not an indulgence,
but it's a correction.
Because once you
make that time, you
see the sanity of needing that
time, that it's so important.
>>LISA: You've built
that into your life now.
>>CHOQUETTE: Yes.
>>LISA: How?
>>CHOQUETTE: Well, in my
move to Paris, every morning
I probably walk three
hours before I do anything.
I just get up and walk
and go and explore
and don't really
have a direction.
>>LISA: You don't power-walk.
You just go for the journey.
>>CHOQUETTE: No.
I just stroll and explore and
watch and listen to my spirit.
I'm not in a hurry
anymore, because I
know there's nowhere to go.
I learned that.
There's no place to go.
There's just walking home.
There's just more presence to be
with myself, and be with life.
And the interesting paradox
of that is it stretches time.
I just seem to have
somehow a lot of time.
>>LISA: So if you go
walking in the morning,
you can still get back by
9:00 AM and have a full day.
>>CHOQUETTE: And
still have a full day,
and stay up until midnight
and have a full night.
I'm not so time-bound,
and I'm not
fighting with timing anymore.
>>LISA: How did you
do that in the past?
>>CHOQUETTE: I was always
ambitious to do as much
good in the world as I could,
and that made me very busy.
And now I'm not so
ambitious to do that.
Because I know that
was very noble,
but it wasn't good for me.
And so now, my prayer every
day is, use me as you see fit.
And I'm available, but
I am going to relax.
>>LISA: But you still
get things done.
>>CHOQUETTE: Yeah,
as much as ever.
But I'm not stressed.
>>LISA: Really?
>>CHOQUETTE: I still write.
I still have my clients.
I still teach.
But I'm not in emergency.
>>LISA: There is such
a difference right now
from what you just explained.
You still get the
same amount done.
>>CHOQUETTE: But I'm
not in the, I'm late,
I'm late, for a
very important date.
>>LISA: And not taking
that toll on your body.
>>CHOQUETTE: No.
No.
And I really do think that's
why I feel really good.
>>LISA: And look about
10 years younger.
Not that you looked
old, but wow.
>>CHOQUETTE: People
say that, and I
know that it's because I'm
not in that frequency that's
so contracted.
>>LISA: Frequency and
chemical rays, and--
>>CHOQUETTE: Yeah.
I just feel like
it'll all be OK.
It'll be OK.
I don't have to be managing.
It'll all be OK.
>>LISA: But you don't really
use your intuition a lot
with that, as well.
Because when you say
yes to something--
>>CHOQUETTE: Only follow that.
>>LISA: Yeah.
When you say yes to an
appointment or something,
instead of over-committing,
your intuition
comes in and tells you.
>>CHOQUETTE: Right.
>>LISA: Do you
label that intuition
from the higher source?
>>CHOQUETTE: That's
my spirit and my guide
and my higher self,
and heaven and nature.
>>LISA: It's all of it.
>>CHOQUETTE: It's all of it.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>CHOQUETTE: It's a
symphony of guidance.
>>LISA: It's not just
one, even though you
were raised Catholic.
>>CHOQUETTE: Yes.
And it's still my
saints and angels,
and they're all in there.
>>LISA: But it's not one god?
>>CHOQUETTE: No.
God is so all that.
>>LISA: All encompassing.
In every speck of nature.
>>CHOQUETTE: Yes.
>>LISA: And that's
what you listen to.
>>CHOQUETTE: Yes.
And I do have to say, I'm
not talking in my head much,
and I don't think.
I just listen and
feel the vibration.
>>LISA: That's an inspiration.
>>CHOQUETTE: And it works.
>>LISA: Right there
is an inspiration.
Yet, you still get
the same amount done.
>>CHOQUETTE: Absolutely.
>>LISA: Do you set forward
goals for yourself?
>>CHOQUETTE: I used to.
That's another thing
that's very interesting
since my second Camino.
I have no ability to
set any goals right now.
>>LISA: Ability?
>>CHOQUETTE: I have no goals.
I'm just like, OK, I want
to just be here and show up.
And whatever shows
up, I'll trust that.
>>LISA: How long ago
did you get back?
>>CHOQUETTE: I got back in July.
It's been a few months.
>>LISA: A little
over six months.
And you've been in
this space since then.
And no need to change?
>>CHOQUETTE: I don't
feel the need to change.
I just feel grateful.
>>LISA: Do you think
you'll go back?
>>CHOQUETTE: I would
definitely go back again.
>>LISA: Would you ever lead
groups after you've done it?
>>CHOQUETTE: I've been asked to.
>>LISA: Yeah, I'm sure.
>>CHOQUETTE: I will
say it's possible,
but I'm not feeling that
calling at the moment,
nor do I think people
need to be led.
I think you just show up.
And maybe that's why
I'm not feeling it.
I feel like your
spirit will lead you.
>>LISA: That is a
great, great point.
I don't think they
need to be led, either.
>>CHOQUETTE: No.
We're going to take a
look here at one more
video with Sonia Choquette.
Take a look.
>>CHOQUETTE: One of the
most common questions
that I am met with
by my students
and clients is, how do I
attract more money into my life?
I just seem like I can't quite
get into the prosperity flow.
And the first thing
you need to do
is change your whole
relationship to money.
Rather than thinking
that it's something
that you have to go after
and you have to struggle for
and you have to work hard
for and the exchange is going
to come to that way, come
back into your spirit,
come back into your breath, and
begin to open up and practice
becoming a better receiver,
because people who
are prosperous have no
problem not only receiving,
but expecting good things
and prosperity to come.
So the best way to start
is start paying attention
to all the ways good
things are coming already.
What have you received
today that was
a blessing, that was abundant
that you did not expect?
And say thank you out loud,
and make a game of it.
Maybe you received three
times today something
you didn't expect
that was really good.
See if maybe it can happen four
times tomorrow, or five times.
See, the key is that you're
receiving all the time,
but it's actually your awareness
and your conscience acceptance
of what's coming your way
that will amplify your ability
to make money.
So that's Part A.
And Part B is, say
thank you a lot.
Thank you for the gifts.
Say thank you to the universe.
Thank you to your friends.
Thank you to anybody,
anywhere, anytime,
bringing goodness to
you, because the more
you receive goodness,
the more it amplifies.
And it starts to become an
energetic magnet to pull
in more and more and more.
So first it might just
start in abundant gifts,
abundant blessings,
but absolutely it
will become eventually
abundant money.
So it's up to you.
This is not about a struggle.
It's not about going after.
It's not even necessarily
connected to "work"
in the traditional way.
And then one final thing
when you do go to work,
let your expression
of being at work
be a blessing to someone else.
So rather than going to
work and resenting the day,
or showing up with no energy
or not liking where you are,
show up to the day deciding that
no matter what happens today,
in my work and in my
expression of my work I
will be a blessing.
So whoever had anything
to do with the receiving
end of my work will feel
better, will feel happy,
uplifted, will feel good about
their experience of my work.
The twofold practice
will bring you
into a higher and far more
prosperous, far more abundant--
and in time, financially
abundant-- experience.
Try it.
I think you'll be surprised.
All my love.
>>LISA: Wow.
Thank you for being
just the inspiration
that you are, because as
people watch your energy
and how comfortable
you are, really truly,
in your skin-- you're not
talking about 10 steps to being
comfortable in your own skin.
You are comfortable
in your own skin.
>>CHOQUETTE: I took 1,000 to
get comfortable in my own skin.
>>LISA: 1,000 miles.
>>CHOQUETTE: I'm
grateful to be here.
It's an honor to share such an
intimate experience with you
and with the people who watch.
And I'm just very humble.
It's all a gift.
One thing I do know about life
is, it really is all a gift.
>>LISA: It is.
And you enjoy it.
>>CHOQUETTE: Yes.
>>LISA: And also,
recommends the Camino, yes?
>>CHOQUETTE: I recommend, if
you want an experience that
will rejuvenate and call
all the pieces of you
that you somehow had to
surrender for whatever
unsafe moment that was,
and get them all back
and celebrate all those glorious
pieces of you, this will do it.
>>LISA: Wonderful.
Wonderful.
Thank you so much, Sonia.
>>CHOQUETTE: Thank you, Lisa.
I'm always honored
to be with you.
>>LISA: It's my pleasure.
>>CHOQUETTE: I'm very
grateful, thank you.
>>LISA: And just
to be so connected
is such a beautiful-- I
love looking into your eyes.
>>CHOQUETTE: Thank you.
>>LISA: You have a
lot of journey there.
You can go deeply there.
I hope that you saw that too.
And if you would like to
watch a replay of my interview
with Sonia, you can
go to gaiamtv.com.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay inspired.
[MUSIC PLAYING]